Title: Which one is banana man? Evaluating vision-language models in multi-turn pragmatic interpretation

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2608.29571v1

Published Time: Tue, 01 Sep 2026 01:25:47 GMT

Number of Pages: 17

Markdown Content:
# Which one is banana man? Evaluating vision–language models in multi-turn pragmatic interpretation 

## Alvin W. M. Tan* 1, Ben Prystawski* 1, Veronica Boyce 1,2 

> 1

## Department of Psychology, Stanford University, USA 

> 2

## Department of Brain and Cognitive Sciences, MIT, USA *Equal contribution 

## {tanawm, benpry}@stanford.edu vboyce@mit.edu 

## Abstract 

Flexible adaptation to context and shared prag-matic intuitions contribute to smooth human conversation. Iterated reference games—in which players repeatedly pick out novel refer-ents using language—present a test case for agents’ ability to perform context-sensitive pragmatic reasoning in multi-turn linguistic environments. We tested humans and vision– language models on their ability to identify the intended meaning of descriptions produced in iterated reference games, varying the provided context in terms of amount, order, and rele-vance. While humans performed well consis-tently, the models we evaluated could make use of prior context to interpret humans’ referring expressions, but they struggled to build up the relevant context to interpret those expressions effectively. Our results suggest that the mod-els we evaluated lack core skills needed for efficient linguistic collaboration. 

## 1 Introduction 

Recent advances in machine learning have pro-duced multi-turn conversational agents, which are a public face of artificial intelligence (OpenAI, 2024). The utility of conversational agents depends on capacities including natural language understand-ing, world knowledge, and instruction following (Guan et al., 2026). Furthermore, success in multi-turn conversation requires the underlying language model to respond to the user’s message appropri-ately given the preceding context, which in turn requires the model to retain relevant contextual in-formation and use it to interpret new messages. Such multi-turn interactions are a core feature of human communication: shared conversational history supports a shared system of semantic mean-ing (Clark, 1996; Geurts, 2024). Iterated reference games are a common experimental paradigm for studying this type of communication. In iterated reference games, a describer produces a description of a referent so that a matcher can select the referent from a set of options. Over multiple rounds, con-ventionalised referring expressions usually emerge from repeated descriptions of the same referent (Clark and Wilkes-Gibbs, 1986). These experi-ments demonstrate that humans dynamically adapt to their conversational partners, creating ad hoc context- and/or partner-specific meanings and con-ventions (Clark and Wilkes-Gibbs, 1986; Hawkins et al., 2023a; Boyce et al., 2024). Humans can also comprehend conventionalized descriptions from games they were not part of, especially when pro-vided with the original context (Schober and Clark, 1989; Hawkins et al., 2023b; Boyce et al., 2025). Conversations—whether human–human or human–AI—require their participants to use contextual information to understand the meanings of utterances. A system that uses context to under-stand conversation would show two behavioural signatures: (1) the ability to interpret linguistic meaning pragmatically and (2) sensitivity to contextual information (Hawkins et al., 2023b; Gul and Artzi, 2024; Hua and Artzi, 2024; Sravanthi et al., 2024; Boyce et al., 2025; Chen et al., 2025b; Junker and Zarrieß, 2025). In this work, we employ iterated reference games as a minimal test case to investigate whether state-of-the-art vision–language models (VLMs) reason pragmatically about referring expressions to re-solve referential ambiguity given varying types of prior context, and how their sensitivity to context compares to that of humans. 

## 2 Related work 

Model performance in interpreting descriptions from iterated reference games relies on several ca-pacities, including the use of visual information for grounding, tracking and deploying information over multi-turn conversation, pragmatic reasoning, and conversational adaptation. arXiv:2608.29571v1 [cs.CL] 30 Aug 2026 2.1 Integrating visual information in VLMs 

Reference games use images to provide grounded context, but the vision abilities of VLMs are much weaker than their language understanding abilities. Some image information encoded by the vision en-coder is not effectively decoded and used by VLMs, leading to poor performance at image classification for lower frequency classes (Zhang et al., 2024), poor performance at identifying shape overlaps or counting shapes (Rahmanzadehgervi et al., 2024), and poor spatial reasoning (Kamath et al., 2023; Liu et al., 2023; Chen et al., 2025a). VLMs also tend to overlook atypical features of images and rely on general world knowledge instead (Vo et al., 2025). Thus, VLMs seem to remain limited in their ability to flexibly integrate relevant visual informa-tion (Tong et al., 2026). 

2.2 Evaluating multi-turn conversational abilities in language models 

Several recent benchmarks, such as MT-Eval (Kwan et al., 2024), MultiChallenge (Deshpande et al., 2025), Multi-Turn Puzzles (Badola et al., 2025), and MT-PingEval (Eisenstein et al., 2026), have evaluated language models in multi-turn contexts to assess their ability to maintain co-herent responses across a conversation and use earlier-provided information to inform later re-sponses. Even contemporary commercial models do poorly on these benchmarks, exhibiting inco-herence across responses, and failure to use earlier information when it is relevant but not explicitly noted as such. Models also struggle to efficiently collaborate to establish common ground (Eisen-stein et al., 2026). Model behaviour in multi-turn contexts is weaker than in single-shot contexts in part because errors can compound across the inter-action; models perform better given correct con-text than their own previously generated responses (Kwan et al., 2024). 

2.3 Assessing pragmatics in VLMs 

Pragmatics is a broad term that encompasses lan-guage that is sensitive to different types of context, including cultural knowledge, grounded visual con-text, the knowledge state of the interlocutor, and the recent conversational context (Floyd et al., 2025). Grounded referring expressions are a long-standing test bed for building computational models of prag-matics, which are historically rule-based symbolic or probabilistic models (Golland et al., 2010; Krah-mer and Van Deemter, 2012; Kazemzadeh et al., 2014). Some of these models learned from co-occurrence statistics to overcome misaligned or in-complete perceptual information (Liu et al., 2012; Tellex et al., 2014; Liu and Chai, 2015). More re-cently, single-shot reference games have been used to assess how models understand and generate con-textually appropriate descriptions, and to evaluate whether they match human preferences, among other pragmatic tests (Fried et al., 2023; Ma et al., 2025). Referring tasks can also test interlocutor-specific adjustments when a specific listener has a different visual perspective or a different set of background knowledge and vocabulary (Bao et al., 2022; Takmaz et al., 2023; Tang et al., 2024). 

2.4 VLMs and iterated reference games 

Iterated reference games represent a difficult test of VLM pragmatics, sometimes incorporating diffi-cult visual context and requiring online adaptation to the conversational partner. Prior work suggests VLMs can do a reasonable job at comprehending human-generated descriptions of naturalistic im-ages that increase in efficiency (Hawkins et al., 2020; Greco et al., 2023; Hua and Artzi, 2024). Several recent studies have compared human– human dyads to human–AI and AI–AI dyads using more difficult contexts such as tangrams or similar-looking visual stimuli (Jones et al., 2026; Zeng et al., 2026). While frontier models can achieve reasonable accuracy when playing with each other, their dynamics and descriptions do not match the patterns of humans (Imai et al., 2025; Zhao and Conwell, 2025). Human–AI dyads perform poorly, with low accuracy, compared to either AI–AI or human-human dyads. Training models on the task and giving explicit prompts both lead to somewhat higher performance and superficially more human-like descriptions than base models (Takmaz et al., 2020; Gul and Artzi, 2024; Hua and Artzi, 2024; Chen et al., 2025b; Vaduguru et al., 2026), but no model shows the partner-sensitive convention-formation charac-teristic of human interaction. While they did not compare directly to human performance, Wang et al. (2025) find that VLMs are generally weak at understanding descriptions for iterated reference games, regardless of the amount of earlier context. Figure 1: (A) Overview of the experimental structure for the original interactive games in Boyce et al. (2024). (B) User interface for each trial in the experiments with naïve participants. 

## 3 Methods 

All model and analysis code is available on GitHub, and data are available on OSF. AI assistants were used for some coding tasks, but not for any other purpose in this project. 

3.1 Dataset 

We used an iterated reference game dataset from Boyce et al. (2024). In each game, players saw a grid of 12 tangram images (Figure 1A). On each trial, the describer saw one image highlighted and described it to the other players via chatbox so that matchers could each select the target from the 12 options. Each game had 2–6 players, who played 6 rounds of 12 trials each (one trial for each image). Here we use ten of these games, which were sub-sequently used by Boyce et al. (2025) to test for context sensitivity in naïve human matchers. Naïve matchers read transcripts of the conversations be-tween the players in the original games and chose what image was being described (Figure 1B). They received feedback on whether they were correct, but were not told the correct answer if they were incorrect. Boyce et al. (2025) collected participants who saw the trials in the original (yoked) order (N = 99) or shuffled ( N = 98). We collected ad-ditional human data on Prolific in the backward (N = 89) and random ( N = 107) conditions (de-scribed in Section 3.3) using the same procedure. See Appendix A.1 for more details. 

3.2 Experiment setup 

Our experiments with VLMs aimed to match the naïve human setup. We focused on evaluating the instruction-tuned versions of five leading open-weights VLMs of different sizes: Qwen 3 VL 32B (Bai et al., 2025), Gemma 3 27B (Gemma Team et al., 2025), Llama 3.2 11B (Llama Team, 2024), Molmo 2 8B (Clark et al., 2026), and Kimi VL A3B (Kimi Team et al., 2025). Models were given a general system prompt describing the task setup, followed by the set of 12 tangram image options labeled A–L presented as a single image. All open models were run with the vLLM inference frame-work (Kwon et al., 2023). See Appendix A for additional details. Models were then given the context of all preceding trials formatted as a chat history, with the user supplying the text written by participants and the model serving as the assistant providing the target tangram, denoted A–L. Finally, the description for the test trial was provided, and the model log probabilities for the tokens A–L were obtained. We renormalised the log probabilities us-ing a softmax, and treated the probability assigned to the correct target as the model’s accuracy. 

3.3 Context conditions 

To investigate the role of prior contextual informa-tion, we considered eight conditions varying the amount and type of in-context trials (Table 1). The conditions varied in their fidelity to the context experienced by human participants in the original iterated reference games. Our main set of conditions contained trials that were cumulative (i.e., in-context trials had been seen exactly in order), for which we had compara-tive naïve human data. Three conditions contained trials drawn from a single original game: the yoked ,

backward , and shuffled conditions presented all the trials in the original game, in the original, reversed, or permuted order respectively. We also included a 

random condition that fully shuffled across games and trial orders. To further explore how prior context informed VLM interpretation, we considered additional con-ditions for which the trials were not cumulative. The ablated condition presented trials in the origi-nal order, but in-context trials containing the same Table 1: Conditions of in-context trials seen by models. Columns indicate whether the in-context trials are from the same original game as the test trial, whether the in-context trials are all from the same original game, what the order of the in-context trials is, and whether the tangram in the test trial occurs in the in-context trials.                                              

> Condition Ntrials Original game Same game Trial order Same tangram seen Cumulative Yoked 720 YYOriginal YBackward 720 YYReversed YShuffled 7056 YYPermuted YRandom 7704 NNPermuted YNon-cumulative Ablated 720 YYOriginal NOther-within 6480 NYOriginal YOther-across 6480 NNOriginal YNo context 720 NNNone N

target as the test trial were removed. Two other con-ditions involved in-context trials sampled from dif-ferent original games than the test trial. The other-within condition drew all in-context trials from a single different original game than the test trial, whereas the other-across condition drew in-context trials randomly from all other original games. Fi-nally, we had a baseline condition of no context , in which no in-context trials were presented. 

3.4 Feedback availability 

How much do models rely on information provided in feedback? We varied the type of feedback pro-vided in the in-context trials to distinguish retrieval from learning. 1 Our primary type of feedback was 

interactive limited feedback : in-context trials con-tained models’ own prior guesses, and whether those guesses were correct or not. This setup was the most similar to what naïve humans experienced in our experiments. As additional comparisons, we also evaluated models given human-yoked limited feedback : in-context trials contained human partic-ipants’ prior guesses, and whether those guesses were correct or not; and given full feedback : in-context trials contained the correct answers, always marked as correct. In full feedback, many trials can be solved by retrieving the most semantically similar in-context trial and repeating the answer (whereas this heuristic may not have been available in the other feedback types since the previous guess may not have been correct). 

## 4 Results 

We first compare model and human performance across different trial orders and different amounts of prior context. We then use additional control conditions to more precisely evaluate models. 

> 1Note that the no context condition did not include any in-context trials, so there was no effect of feedback condition.

4.1 Models struggle to reason correctly in iterated reference games 

Our first question was whether VLMs were able to perform ad hoc pragmatic reference resolution in our abstract, out-of-domain context. Figure 2A shows the results from all open-weights models in the cumulative conditions under interactive limited feedback, along with comparative human data from the original reference games and from naïve hu-mans. All models demonstrated above-chance ac-curacy on the task across all conditions. Addition-ally, model performance began low and improved very slightly across rounds, especially from rounds 1 to 3, suggesting some adaptation to the task. In contrast, naïve humans’ performance was relatively high even in the first repetition and showed greater improvement over rounds in the yoked, backward, and shuffled conditions. Performance in the shuf-fled and random conditions was generally poorer than in the yoked condition, matching naïve hu-mans. Broadly, interpreting pragmatic references to tangram images remains a challenging task for models in comparison to humans. 

4.2 Providing additional contextual information improves model performance 

We next examined how feedback availability af-fected model performance. Figure 2B and 2C show the results from all models in the cumulative con-ditions under human-yoked limited feedback and full feedback respectively, again with comparative human data (although it is important to note that the humans themselves only received interactive limited feedback). Models showed substantial im-provement with human-yoked limited feedback, and further improvements still with full feedback. Notably, in the yoked, backward, and shuffled con-ditions, models reached an asymptote close to hu-man levels in the human-yoked limited feedback Figure 2: Matcher accuracy across all cumulative conditions and matcher types (both human and model), with best-fit LOESS curves, shown by repetition number as seen by the matcher. Subplots reflect the type of feedback received by model matchers: (A) interactive limited feedback, (B) human-yoked limited feedback, or (C) full feedback. Error bars indicate bootstrapped 95% confidence intervals. Dashed lines indicate the chance level (0.083). 

condition, and close to 100% accuracy in the full feedback condition. In the random condition, mod-els mostly remained worse than humans; drawing in-context trials from different games may have limited the amount of relevant contextual informa-tion available. These trends suggest that models were able to exploit the correct responses found in the in-context trials to attain better subsequent performance. 

4.3 Only relevant contextual information improves model performance 

We investigated what types of contextual infor-mation help model performance by turning to the non-cumulative conditions under full feedback, as shown in Figure 3. In these conditions, informa-tion relevant to the current trial was unlikely to be present in the in-context trials, since previous instances of the specific target–game combination of the test trial were not present. When the con-versational history came from a different game or games (other-within and other-across), models had much lower accuracy of 0.3 – 0.6. The lower per-formance compared to the yoked, shuffled, and backward conditions suggests that model improve-ment with relevant context was not simply adap-tation to the task. Rather, the boost depended on the in-context and test trials coming from the same original game, as conventions reached by one game 

> Figure 3: Matcher accuracy in full feedback across all non-cumulative conditions, with best-fit LOESS curves, shown by repetition number as seen by the matcher except for the no context condition, which is shown by the original repetition number. Error bars indicate bootstrapped 95% confidence intervals. Dashed lines indicate the chance level (0.083).

are not necessarily predicted by the context from other games. Performance was also low in the ablated condition, implying that experience with the test trial tangram itself was crucial to under-stand a convention, which was not systematically inferrable from other tangram conventions, even from the same game. These results further support the hypothesis that models are mostly retrieving Figure 4: Trial accuracy as a function of previous-repetition accuracy for the same tangram across matchers for the yoked, backward, shuffled, and random conditions under interactive limited feedback. The top row displays accuracy for trials subsequent to a correct trial, while the bottom row displays accuracy for trials subsequent to an incorrect trial. Error bars indicate bootstrapped 95% confidence intervals. Dashed lines indicate the chance level (0.083). 

from relevant in-context trials rather than learning over the course of the task. Nonetheless, model performance in the other-within, other-across, and ablated conditions tended to be better than the no context condition, suggesting that at least some learning was occurring. 

4.4 Models fail to learn from past mistakes 

As an alternative window into the effect of feedback on performance, we visualised matcher accuracy from the second repetition onward as a function of whether the matcher selected correctly in the previous repetition of the same tangram, as shown in Figure 4. 2

In the yoked, shuffled, and backward conditions, when both humans and models answered a previous repetition correctly, they were also very likely to an-swer the next repetition correctly. However, results were different when matchers answered a previous repetition incorrectly: naïve humans were able to correct their previous mistakes approximately half the time, whereas models were at or worse than chance. Thus, models’ overall performance may have been largely driven by the correct answers they happened to attain and retain, rather than learn-ing over the course of the task. Follow-up analy-ses where models saw the same items repeatedly 

> 2We quantised previous repetition accuracy by determin-ing whether the argmax of the probabilities was the target tangram for models, and by determining whether any matcher selected correctly for the original-game humans; naïve human performance was already binarised.

demonstrate that models did not learn over repeti-tions, and instead perseverated, selecting the same wrong answer (see Appendix B.6). We speculate that the incorrect responses may have provided ad-ditional evidence for incorrect sequences, increas-ing the probability that they are later reproduced (ignoring the “correct/incorrect” feedback). Fur-ther work exploring perseveration across a broader range of contexts will help to clarify model re-sponse dynamics across multi-turn conversations. 

4.5 VLMs make limited use of visual information 

To determine the extent to which VLMs were using the tangram images to perform pragmatic reason-ing, we also ran all models using a prompt that did not include the tangram images. The difference in accuracy between the image–text and the text-only paradigms is shown in Figure 5. Models generally performed worse without im-ages than with images in the first repetition, and performance collapsed to chance without context; however, by the third repetition, models were not different whether or not they had images in most conditions. Models remained slightly worse with-out images in conditions with limited relevant con-textual information (random, other-within, other-across, and ablated). Notably Llama 3.2 was better without the image in many conditions, especially in the second repetition. Some models seem to primarily use text information to select the correct Figure 5: Difference in accuracy between the text-only and image–text paradigms across all conditions and models under full feedback. Error bars indicate bootstrapped 95% confidence intervals. Dashed lines indicate no difference. 

match, which corroborates results from Hua and Artzi (2024), showing that when images are shuf-fled from trial to trial, VLMs exhibit little to no learning over repetitions. 

4.6 Models and humans diverge in their responses 

To examine whether models generally showed the same response patterns as humans, we compared model and naïve human performance at the trial level under interactive limited feedback (Figure 6). Models were relatively poorly calibrated, with weak correlations between model and human per-formance (yoked model r = -.07 – .46, human split-half r = .42 [.32, .50]; backward model r = -.07 – .40, human split-half r = .48 [.40, .55]; see Ap-pendix B.2 for more details). Models may not have the same factors affecting their performance as hu-mans, resulting in a lack of trial-wise similarity. We investigated the divergent human and model results by exploring features of the tangram de-scriptions driving human and model performance. Specifically, we investigated the possible roles of metaphorical and holistic descriptions. These dimensions were inspired by Clark and Wilkes-Gibbs (1986), who predicted that in later repeti-tions, dyads should prefer metaphorical descrip-tions to literal ones and holistic descriptions to part-based ones, as metaphorical and holistic descrip-tions would require less communicative effort. 3

> 3Note that Clark and Wilkes-Gibbs (1986) referred to

Clark and Wilkes-Gibbs (1986) also suggested that these two dimensions may be strongly correlated— metaphorical descriptions allow for different com-ponents to be jointly described as an overall silhou-ette, whereas more literal descriptions typically jux-tapose descriptions of the individual components. Since the later repetitions were when models and humans diverged the most, we hypothesised that the types of descriptions may play a role in ex-plaining such divergence. (See Appendix B.5 for a complementary approach focusing on lemmas.) We used LLM-assisted annotation to annotate spans of referential descriptions in each tangram description; see Appendix A.4 for more details. The proportion of metaphorical spans and the pro-portion of holistic spans were significantly but only moderately correlated ( r = .36 [.32, .41], p < .001), suggesting that they were indexing different fea-tures of descriptions. We then ran a quasibino-mial regression predicting matcher accuracy from matcher type (human / model, with human as the reference level), the proportion of metaphorical spans, the proportion of holistic spans, and all in-teractions among these predictors. As shown in Figure 7, there was a significant effect of the pro-portion of metaphorical spans ( b = 1.38 [1.08, 1.69], 

p < .001) as well as matcher type ( b = -0.90 [-1.20, -0.61], p < .001). Most interestingly, there was also a significant interaction between the proportion of metaphorical spans and matcher type ( b = -1.06   

> metaphorical descriptions as “analogical”. Figure 6: Comparison between naïve human accuracy and model accuracy under interactive limited feedback, with best-fit linear regressions. Shaded regions indicate 95% confidence intervals. Dashed lines indicate perfect calibration ( y=x).
> Figure 7: Matcher accuracy as a function of the propor-tion of metaphorical and holistic spans in descriptions.

[-1.40, -0.72], p < .001); estimated marginal trends showed that humans showed a strong positive ef-fect of metaphorical spans ( b = 1.08 [0.84, 1.31]) whereas models showed a much weaker effect ( b =0.22 [0.10, 0.35]). No effects including the propor-tion of holistic spans were significant. Additional analyses on item-level effects and condition-wise correlations are shown in Ap-pendix B. 

4.7 Frontier models still fail to reach human-level performance 

As an extension, we evaluated three frontier VLMs on the yoked and no context conditions under inter-active limited feedback to determine whether bet-ter and larger models trained on more data could approach human-level performance. The frontier models we evaluated were Gemini 3 Flash (Gemini Team, 2025), GPT 5.2 (OpenAI, 2025), and Claude Sonnet 4.6 (Claude Team, 2026). The log proba-bilities were not fully obtainable for all of these models, so we computed a Monte Carlo estimate of their probability distributions by resampling gen-

> Figure 8: Matcher accuracy for frontier models under interactive limited feedback.

erations 10 × for each trial (see Appendix A.3 for more details). We used the lowest reasoning level to approximate humans’ relatively fast response times on this task. Models sometimes failed to re-turn valid responses; we ignored such errors and renormalised excluding them (see Appendix B.7). As shown in Figure 8, frontier models demon-strated better performance than open-weights mod-els in general, but were still worse than naïve hu-mans on the whole. The no context condition had only slightly worse accuracies than the yoked con-dition, also suggesting limited learning over the course of the task. Trials from later rounds were also more difficult for frontier models. 

## 5 Discussion 

Multi-turn conversation is a key aspect of human communication and a challenge for AI agents. We demonstrated that state-of-the-art open-weights VLMs were able to perform ad hoc pragmatic rea-soning across multiple turns of a reference game, but were still substantially worse than humans. Models were sensitive to the presence of relevant contextual information, showing greater improve-ment when correct answers were present in their context, and limited learning when the correct an-swers were unavailable. This pattern appeared due to models’ failure to learn from past mistakes, whereas humans could. Our results align with pre-vious work on in-context learning, where increas-ing the number of valid in-context examples im-proved model performance, especially on difficult tasks (Chen et al., 2023; Agarwal et al., 2024; Jiang et al., 2024). Furthermore, models displayed different patterns of performance than humans and showed weak trial-wise calibration to human accuracies. These discrepancies were partially explained by the fact that humans were much more accurate with more metaphorical spans, whereas models were only weakly so. The differential sensitivity to quan-tity and type of context between humans and mod-els could suggest different approaches to the task. For example, models can (theoretically) exactly retrieve previous trial descriptions, whereas hu-mans have more limited working memories and may need to use compression or other strategies to recall appropriate description–referent mappings. Overall, reference games with abstract referents remain a difficult task for machine learning models, particularly in the few-shot setting (Gul and Artzi, 2024; Chen et al., 2025b). Our results point to the important role of contextual information, but also highlight ways in which current VLMs are limited in bootstrapping their own learning. Further work is needed to more comprehensively characterise the role of prompt engineering, causal and atten-tional factors underlying context use, and humans’ own sensitivity to context. Furthermore, our study focused on interpretation, but generating appropri-ate descriptions is a yet harder task that is worth exploring. These directions will help us to build language models that are flexible but robust, and that can adapt to a range of tasks and settings as humans do. 

## Limitations 

While we attempted to match the task for humans and models as much as possible, some differences still remained; for example, we ignored model con-tinuations which were not one of A–L, whereas human participants were explicitly limited in the range of response options (i.e., they were only able to select one of A–L, and could not offer any other response type). Additionally, we tested a limited set of abstract stimuli as a representative example, and focused on English language responses; gen-eralisability to other (e.g., naturalistic) stimuli sets as well as other languages (especially low-resource languages) is left to future work. Finally, while it-erated reference games serve as a paradigm for im-portant kinds of pragmatic inference, it is not a pure measure of pragmatics, nor is it a comprehensive evaluation for pragmatic ability and reasoning in general; other complementary tasks will be needed to more fully assess the pragmatic capabilities of any model. 

## Acknowledgments 

We would like to thank Michael C. Frank for ad-vice and funding support, as well as members of the Language and Cognition Lab, members of the So-cial Interaction Lab, and reviewers at ARR and the NeurIPS CogInterp Workshop for helpful feedback on this work. 

## References    

> Rishabh Agarwal, Avi Singh, Lei Zhang, Bernd Bohnet, Luis Rosias, Stephanie Chan, Biao Zhang, Ankesh Anand, Zaheer Abbas, Azade Nova, John D. Co-Reyes, Eric Chu, Feryal Behbahani, Aleksandra Faust, and Hugo Larochelle. 2024. Many-Shot In-Context Learning. In Advances in Neural Informa-tion Processing Systems , volume 37, pages 76930– 76966. Kartikeya Badola, Jonathan Simon, Arian Hosseini, Sara Marie Mc Carthy, Tsendsuren Munkhdalai, Abhimanyu Goyal, Tomáš Koˇ cisk` y, Shyam Upad-hyay, Bahare Fatemi, and Mehran Kazemi. 2025. Multi-turn puzzles: Evaluating interactive reason-ing and strategic dialogue in llms. arXiv preprint arXiv:2508.10142 .Shuai Bai, Yuxuan Cai, Ruizhe Chen, Keqin Chen, Xionghui Chen, Zesen Cheng, Lianghao Deng, Wei Ding, Chang Gao, Chunjiang Ge, Wenbin Ge, Zhi-fang Guo, Qidong Huang, Jie Huang, Fei Huang, Binyuan Hui, Shutong Jiang, Zhaohai Li, Mingsheng Li, and 45 others. 2025. Qwen3-vl technical report.
> Preprint , arXiv:2511.21631. Yuwei Bao, Sayan Ghosh, and Joyce Chai. 2022. Learn-ing to Mediate Disparities Towards Pragmatic Com-munication. In Proceedings of the 60th Annual Meet-ing of the Association for Computational Linguistics (Volume 1: Long Papers) , pages 2829–2842, Dublin, Ireland. Association for Computational Linguistics.

Veronica Boyce, Robert D Hawkins, Noah D Goodman, and Michael C Frank. 2024. Interaction structure con-strains the emergence of conventions in group com-munication. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences , 121(28):e2403888121. Veronica Boyce, Ben Prystawski, Alvin Wei Ming Tan, and Michael C. Frank. 2025. Idiosyncratic but not opaque: Linguistic conventions formed in reference games are interpretable by naïve humans and vision– language models. In Proceedings of the Annual Meet-ing of the Cognitive Science Society , volume 47. Jiuhai Chen, Lichang Chen, Chen Zhu, and Tianyi Zhou. 2023. How Many Demonstrations Do You Need for In-context Learning? In Findings of the Association for Computational Linguistics: EMNLP 2023 , pages 11149–11159, Singapore. Association for Computa-tional Linguistics. Shiqi Chen, Tongyao Zhu, Ruochen Zhou, Jinghan Zhang, Siyang Gao, Juan Carlos Niebles, Mor Geva, Junxian He, Jiajun Wu, and Manling Li. 2025a. Why is spatial reasoning hard for vlms? an attention mech-anism perspective on focus areas. In Forty-second In-ternational Conference on Machine Learning, ICML 2025, Vancouver, BC, Canada, July 13-19, 2025 , Pro-ceedings of Machine Learning Research. PMLR / OpenReview.net. Zizhao Chen, Mustafa Omer Gul, Yiwei Chen, Glo-ria Geng, Anne Wu, and Yoav Artzi. 2025b. Retro-spective Learning from Interactions. In Proceedings of the 63rd Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics (Volume 1: Long Papers) ,pages 24580–24606, Vienna, Austria. Association for Computational Linguistics. Christopher Clark, Jieyu Zhang, Zixian Ma, Jae Sung Park, Mohammadreza Salehi, Rohun Tripathi, Sangho Lee, Zhongzheng Ren, Chris Dongjoo Kim, Yinuo Yang, Vincent Shao, Yue Yang, Weikai Huang, Ziqi Gao, Taira Anderson, Jianrui Zhang, Jitesh Jain, George Stoica, Winson Han, and 2 others. 2026. Molmo2: Open weights and data for vision-language models with video understanding and grounding. 

Preprint , arXiv:2601.10611. Herbert H. Clark. 1996. Using Language . Cambridge University Press, Cambridge. Herbert H. Clark and Deanna Wilkes-Gibbs. 1986. Re-ferring as a collaborative process. Cognition , 22(1):1– 39. Claude Team. 2026. Introducing Sonnet 4.6. Kaustubh Deshpande, Ved Sirdeshmukh, Johannes Bap-tist Mols, Lifeng Jin, Ed-Yeremai Hernandez-Cardona, Dean Lee, Jeremy Kritz, Willow E. Pri-mack, Summer Yue, and Chen Xing. 2025. Multi-challenge: A realistic multi-turn conversation eval-uation benchmark challenging to frontier llms. In 

Findings of the Association for Computational Lin-guistics, ACL 2025, Vienna, Austria, July 27 - August 1, 2025 , Findings of ACL, pages 18632–18702. As-sociation for Computational Linguistics. Jacob Eisenstein, Fantine Huot, Adam Fisch, Jonathan Berant, and Mirella Lapata. 2026. Mt-pingeval: Eval-uating multi-turn collaboration with private informa-tion games. arXiv preprint arXiv:2602.24188 .Sammy Floyd, Olessia Jouravlev, Moshe Poliak, Zachary Mineroff, Edward Gibson, and Evelina Fe-dorenko. 2025. Three distinct components of prag-matic language use: Social conventions, intona-tion, and world knowledge–based causal reasoning. 

Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences ,122(50):e2424400122. Daniel Fried, Nicholas Tomlin, Jennifer Hu, Roma Pa-tel, and Aida Nematzadeh. 2023. Pragmatics in Lan-guage Grounding: Phenomena, Tasks, and Modeling Approaches. In Findings of the Association for Com-putational Linguistics: EMNLP 2023 , pages 12619– 12640, Singapore. Association for Computational Linguistics. Gemini Team. 2025. A new era of intelligence with Gemini 3. Gemma Team, Aishwarya Kamath, Johan Ferret, Shreya Pathak, Nino Vieillard, Ramona Merhej, Sarah Perrin, Tatiana Matejovicova, Alexandre Ramé, Morgane Rivière, and 1 others. 2025. Gemma 3 technical report. arXiv preprint arXiv:2503.19786 .Bart Geurts. 2024. Common Ground in Pragmatics. In Edward N. Zalta and Uri Nodelman, editors, The Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy , winter 2024 edition. Metaphysics Research Lab, Stanford Univer-sity. Dave Golland, Percy Liang, and Dan Klein. 2010. A game-theoretic approach to generating spatial de-scriptions. In Proceedings of the 2010 conference on empirical methods in natural language processing ,pages 410–419. Claudio Greco, Diksha Bagade, Dieu-Thu Le, and Raf-faella Bernardi. 2023. She adapts to her student: An expert pragmatic speaker tailoring her referring expressions to the Layman listener. Frontiers in Arti-ficial Intelligence , 6. Shengyue Guan, Jindong Wang, Jiang Bian, Bin Zhu, Jian-Guang Lou, and Haoyi Xiong. 2026. Evaluat-ing llm-based agents for multi-turn conversations: A survey. ACM Trans. Intell. Syst. Technol. , 17(4). Mustafa Omer Gul and Yoav Artzi. 2024. CoGen: Learning from Feedback with Coupled Comprehen-sion and Generation. In Proceedings of the 2024 Con-ference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing , pages 12966–12982, Miami, Florida, USA. Association for Computational Linguistics. Robert D Hawkins, Michael Franke, Michael C Frank, Adele E Goldberg, Kenny Smith, Thomas L Grif-fiths, and Noah D Goodman. 2023a. From partners to populations: A hierarchical bayesian account of coordination and convention. Psychological Review ,130(4):977. Robert D. Hawkins, Megumi Sano, Noah D. Goodman, and Judith E. Fan. 2023b. Visual resemblance and interaction history jointly constrain pictorial meaning. 

Nature Communications , 14(1):2199. Robert X. D. Hawkins, Minae Kwon, Dorsa Sadigh, and Noah D. Goodman. 2020. Continual adaptation for efficient machine communication. In Proceedings of the 24th Conference on Computational Natural Language Learning, CoNLL 2020, Online, Novem-ber 19-20, 2020 , pages 408–419. Association for Computational Linguistics. Yilun Hua and Yoav Artzi. 2024. Talk Less, Interact Better: Evaluating In-context Conversational Adap-tation in Multimodal LLMs. In First Conference on Language Modeling .Saki Imai, Mert Inan, Anthony B Sicilia, and Malihe Alikhani. 2025. Measuring how (not just whether) vlms build common ground. In Proceedings of the 15th International Conference on Recent Advances in Natural Language Processing-Natural Language Processing in the Generative AI Era , pages 441–451. Yixing Jiang, Jeremy Andrew Irvin, Ji Hun Wang, Muhammad Ahmed Chaudhry, Jonathan H Chen, and Andrew Y. Ng. 2024. Many-shot in-context learning in multimodal foundation models. In ICML 2024 Workshop on In-Context Learning .Cameron R. Jones, Agnese Lombardi, Kyle Mahowald, and Benjamin K. Bergen. 2026. Llms and people both learn to form conventions – just not with each other. Abstract presented at the 48th Annual Meet-ing of the Cognitive Science Society (CogSci 2026). Preprint available at arXiv:2602.08208 ( https:// arxiv.org/abs/2602.08208 ). Simeon Junker and Sina Zarrieß. 2025. SceneGram: Conceptualizing and Describing Tangrams in Scene Context. In Findings of the Association for Compu-tational Linguistics: ACL 2025 , pages 23976–23992, Vienna, Austria. Association for Computational Lin-guistics. Amita Kamath, Jack Hessel, and Kai-Wei Chang. 2023. What’s “up” with vision-language models? Investi-gating their struggle with spatial reasoning. In Pro-ceedings of the 2023 Conference on Empirical Meth-ods in Natural Language Processing , pages 9161– 9175, Singapore. Association for Computational Lin-guistics. Sahar Kazemzadeh, Vicente Ordonez, Mark Matten, and Tamara Berg. 2014. Referitgame: Referring to objects in photographs of natural scenes. In Proceed-ings of the 2014 conference on empirical methods in natural language processing (EMNLP) , pages 787– 798. Kimi Team, Angang Du, Bohong Yin, Bowei Xing, Bowen Qu, Bowen Wang, Cheng Chen, Chenlin Zhang, Chenzhuang Du, Chu Wei, Congcong Wang, Dehao Zhang, Dikang Du, Dongliang Wang, Enming Yuan, Enzhe Lu, Fang Li, Flood Sung, Guangda Wei, and 76 others. 2025. Kimi-VL Technical Report. 

Preprint , arXiv:2504.07491. Emiel Krahmer and Kees Van Deemter. 2012. Computa-tional generation of referring expressions: A survey. 

Computational Linguistics , 38(1):173–218. Nikolaus Kriegeskorte, Marieke Mur, and Peter Ban-dettini. 2008. Representational similarity analysis – Connecting the branches of systems neuroscience. 

Frontiers in Systems Neuroscience , 2. Wai-Chung Kwan, Xingshan Zeng, Yuxin Jiang, Yufei Wang, Liangyou Li, Lifeng Shang, Xin Jiang, Qun Liu, and Kam-Fai Wong. 2024. MT-Eval: A Multi-Turn Capabilities Evaluation Benchmark for Large Language Models. In Proceedings of the 2024 Con-ference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing , pages 20153–20177, Miami, Florida, USA. Association for Computational Linguistics. Woosuk Kwon, Zhuohan Li, Siyuan Zhuang, Ying Sheng, Lianmin Zheng, Cody Hao Yu, Joseph E. Gonzalez, Hao Zhang, and Ion Stoica. 2023. Effi-cient memory management for large language model serving with pagedattention. In Proceedings of the ACM SIGOPS 29th Symposium on Operating Systems Principles .Changsong Liu and Joyce Chai. 2015. Learning to me-diate perceptual differences in situated human-robot dialogue. In Proceedings of the AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence , volume 29. Changsong Liu, Rui Fang, and Joyce Chai. 2012. To-wards mediating shared perceptual basis in situated dialogue. In Proceedings of the 13th Annual Meet-ing of the Special Interest Group on Discourse and Dialogue , pages 140–149. Fangyu Liu, Guy Emerson, and Nigel Collier. 2023. Visual Spatial Reasoning. Transactions of the Asso-ciation for Computational Linguistics , 11:635–651. Llama Team. 2024. Llama 3.2: Revolutionizing edge AI and vision with open, customizable mod-els. https://ai.meta.com/blog/llama-3-2-connect-2024-vision-edge-mobile-devices/. Ziqiao Ma, Jing Ding, Xuejun Zhang, Dezhi Luo, Jiahe Ding, Sihan Xu, Yuchen Huang, Run Peng, and Joyce Chai. 2025. Vision-language models are not pragmat-ically competent in referring expression generation. In Second Conference on Language Modeling .Kenneth O. McGraw and S. P. Wong. 1996. Forming inferences about some intraclass correlation coeffi-cients. Psychological Methods , 1(1):30–46. OpenAI. 2024. Introducing ChatGPT. https://openai.com/index/chatgpt/. OpenAI. 2025. Introducing GPT-5.2. https://openai.com/index/introducing-gpt-5-2/. Pooyan Rahmanzadehgervi, Logan Bolton, Moham-mad Reza Taesiri, and Anh Totti Nguyen. 2024. Vi-sion language models are blind. In Computer Vision - ACCV 2024 - 17th Asian Conference on Computer Vision, Hanoi, Vietnam, December 8-12, 2024, Pro-ceedings, Part V , Lecture Notes in Computer Science, pages 293–309. Springer. Michael F Schober and Herbert H Clark. 1989. Under-standing by addressees and overhearers. Cognitive Psychology , 21(2):211–232. Settaluri Sravanthi, Meet Doshi, Pavan Tankala, Rudra Murthy, Raj Dabre, and Pushpak Bhattacharyya. 2024. PUB: A Pragmatics Understanding Bench-mark for Assessing LLMs’ Pragmatics Capabilities. In Findings of the Association for Computational Lin-guistics: ACL 2024 , pages 12075–12097, Bangkok, Thailand. Association for Computational Linguistics. Milan Straka. 2018. UDPipe 2.0 Prototype at CoNLL 2018 UD Shared Task. In Proceedings of the CoNLL 2018 Shared Task: Multilingual Parsing from Raw Text to Universal Dependencies , pages 197–207, Brussels, Belgium. Association for Computational Linguistics. Ece Takmaz, Nicolo’ Brandizzi, Mario Giulianelli, San-dro Pezzelle, and Raquel Fernández. 2023. Speak-ing the language of your listener: Audience-aware adaptation via plug-and-play theory of mind. In Find-ings of the Association for Computational Linguis-tics: ACL 2023, Toronto, Canada, July 9-14, 2023 ,Findings of ACL, pages 4198–4217. Association for Computational Linguistics. Ece Takmaz, Mario Giulianelli, Sandro Pezzelle, Ara-bella Sinclair, and Raquel Fernández. 2020. Refer, Reuse, Reduce: Generating Subsequent References in Visual and Conversational Contexts. In Proceed-ings of the 2020 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing (EMNLP) , pages 4350–4368, Online. Association for Computational Linguistics. Zineng Tang, Lingjun Mao, and Alane Suhr. 2024. Grounding Language in Multi-Perspective Referen-tial Communication. In Proceedings of the 2024 Con-ference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing , pages 19727–19741, Miami, Florida, USA. Association for Computational Linguistics. Team Olmo, Allyson Ettinger, Amanda Bertsch, Bailey Kuehl, David Graham, David Heineman, Dirk Groen-eveld, Faeze Brahman, Finbarr Timbers, Hamish Ivison, Jacob Morrison, Jake Poznanski, Kyle Lo, Luca Soldaini, Matt Jordan, Mayee Chen, Michael Noukhovitch, Nathan Lambert, Pete Walsh, and 49 others. 2025. Olmo 3. Preprint , arXiv:2512.13961. Stefanie Tellex, Pratiksha Thaker, Joshua Joseph, and Nicholas Roy. 2014. Learning perceptually grounded word meanings from unaligned parallel data. Ma-chine Learning , 94(2):151–167. Shengbang Tong, David Fan, John Nguyen, Ellis Brown, Gaoyue Zhou, Shengyi Qian, Boyang Zheng, Théo-phane Vallaeys, Junlin Han, Rob Fergus, Naila Mur-ray, Marjan Ghazvininejad, Mike Lewis, Nicolas Bal-las, Amir Bar, Michael Rabbat, Jakob Verbeek, Luke Zettlemoyer, Koustuv Sinha, and 2 others. 2026. Be-yond Language Modeling: An Exploration of Multi-modal Pretraining. Preprint , arXiv:2603.03276. Saujas Vaduguru, Yilun Hua, Yoav Artzi, and Daniel Fried. 2026. Success and cost elicit convention for-mation for efficient communication. In Proceedings of the 64th Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics (Volume 1: Long Papers), ACL 2026, San Diego, California, United States, July 2-7, 2026 , pages 42033–42050. Association for Com-putational Linguistics. An Vo, Khai-Nguyen Nguyen, Mohammad Reza Taesiri, Vy Tuong Dang, Anh Totti Nguyen, and Daeyoung Kim. 2025. Vision Language Models are Biased. 

Preprint , arXiv:2505.23941. Zhengxiang Wang, Weiling Li, Panagiotis Kaliosis, Owen Rambow, and Susan E. Brennan. 2025. LVLMs are Bad at Overhearing Human Referential Communication. In Findings of the Association for Computational Linguistics: EMNLP 2025 , Suzhou. Association for Computational Linguistics. Peter Zeng, Weiling Li, Amie J. Paige, Zhengxiang Wang, Panagiotis Kaliosis, Dimitris Samaras, Gre-gory J. Zelinsky, Susan Brennan, and Owen Ram-bow. 2026. Lvlms and humans ground differently in referential communication. In Proceedings of the 64th Annual Meeting of the Association for Compu-tational Linguistics (Volume 1: Long Papers), ACL 2026, San Diego, California, United States, July 2-7, 2026 , pages 9061–9087. Association for Computa-tional Linguistics. Yuhui Zhang, Alyssa Unell, Xiaohan Wang, Dhruba Ghosh, Yuchang Su, Ludwig Schmidt, and Serena Yeung. 2024. Why are visually-grounded language models bad at image classification? In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems 38: Annual Conference on Neural Information Processing Sys-tems 2024, NeurIPS 2024, Vancouver, BC, Canada, December 10 - 15, 2024 .Haoran Zhao and Colin Conwell. 2025. Comparing human and machine communication patterns through a tangram game. In Proceedings of the Workshop on Data on the Brain & Mind at NeurIPS 2025 .A Additional methodological details 

A.1 Human experiments 

Human experiments were approved by Stanford University IRB under protocol number 20009. Data were collected in August 2025; for reference, data from the original games in Boyce et al. (2024) were collected in June 2024, and naïve human data from Boyce et al. (2025) were collected in Novem-ber 2024. Participants were recruited via Prolific and compensated $3.50 for 20 minutes of their time (hourly wage $10.50, which is above the minimum wage in the United States), as well as $0.05 for each correct answer as a bonus (up to $3.60). Par-ticipants had to be fluent in English, and not have participated in prior related studies. Before begin-ning the experiment, participants gave informed consent about participating in the experiment, that they were assured anonymity, and that they could decline participation at any time. All responses were anonymised. The following instructions were presented to par-ticipants at the start of the experiment:                 

> Please read these instructions carefully!
> In this task, you will see a transcript of a conversa-tion some previous participants had where a speaker identified one of the images to some listeners .Your goal is to read the transcript and figure out which image is being described! You will read the transcript word-by-word, press-ing SPACEBAR to reveal each word. When you have finished reading, you will click the image you think is being described. Then you will find out if your selection is correct .You will see 72 trials . The image choices will be the same on each trial, but the descriptions may come from different groups of people. Some of the transcripts may be much shorter or longer than others. Some of the descriptions may be hard to understand – just take a guess if you are not sure. You will get a bonus of 5 cents for each image you get right!
> Note: These descriptions came from real people and may contain inappropriate or offensive language. If you find a description inappropriate, please let us know via Prolific message or in the exit survey, so we can filter it out in the future.

On each trial, participants saw instructions “Press space to reveal the next word.” until they had revealed all the text, when the instructions switched to “Click on the image that was described.” 

A.2 Prompt and in-context trials 

The system prompt for all language model genera-tions included the following text: 

> You will be presented with a list of messages between people playing a reference game, where the describer has to get the matcher to choose a shape from a set of shapes. Your goal is to guess which of the shapes the describer is trying to get the matcher to choose. The shapes, with their labels, are shown in the image. Please answer with just the letter corresponding to the image you think the describer is trying to get the matcher to choose, and no other text. You will receive feedback telling you whether your choice was correct or incorrect.

Figure 9: The image that was presented to the vision– language models, containing all 12 tangram shapes with their letter labels. 

All conditions except for the no-image condi-tions included the image in Figure 9. In-context trials were presented as if the Assis-tant had responded with a single letter guess, and the User then responds with whether the guess was correct or incorrect, as shown in Figure 10. 

A.3 Inference details 

We ran open-weights models with the vLLM in-ference framework (Kwon et al., 2023). Models were run in bfloat16 precision on two NVIDIA A40 GPUs. We generated the top 1000 logprobs for the first completion token from these models. In some conditions, some of the open-weights models as-signed low probability to all uppercase letters. For instance, Molmo2 preferred lowercase letters in the no image no context condition. For consistency, we use the renormalized distribution over capital letters A-L in all cases. We called frontier models using the correspond-ing APIs: the OpenAI Responses API, the An-thropic API, and the Google GenAI API for GPT Figure 10: Example of the in-context trials presented to a model, with the User providing the trial text, the Assistant providing a guess, and the User responding with the correctness of the guess. 

5.2, Claude 4.6 Sonnet, and Gemini 3 Flash, re-spectively. For each of these models, we turned the reasoning level to the lowest possible setting. We sampled ten completions of at most 256 tokens, then parsed each completion for an uppercase letter representing the model’s choice. If the model did not respond with just a single uppercase letter, the parser first searches for and removes any text that looks like the model continued the conversation, like a model-generated “Correct.” or “describer:”. Next, the parser checks for an answer at the start or the end of the remaining completion. 

A.4 Span annotation 

We prompted Olmo 3 7B Instruct (Team Olmo et al., 2025) to identify spans and tag them along two dimensions: literal / metaphorical, and part-based / holistic. One author (AWMT) manually corrected the spans and tags. Another author (VB) independently corrected the spans and tags for 20% of the trials to determine inter-rater reliability. For each trial, we calculated the proportion of spans tagged as metaphorical, and the proportion tagged as holistic. We calculated the single score two-way agreement intraclass correlation coefficient for 

> Figure 11: Matcher accuracy for the shuffled, backward, random, and no context conditions across all matcher types (both human and model), with best-fit LOESS curves, shown by repetition number from the original game. Error bars indicate bootstrapped 95% confidence intervals. Dashed lines indicate the chance level (0.083).

each dimension (McGraw and Wong, 1996). Inter-rater reliability was excellent for both dimensions, ICC(A, 1) = .954 [.937, .967] for metaphorical, ICC(A, 1) = .824 [.764, .870] for holistic. 

## B Additional results 

B.1 Performance varies by original trial number 

Four conditions displayed trials in a different or-der than the original games: shuffled, backward, random, and no context. To understand the effect of the original trial number, we replotted matcher performance for these conditions by original repeti-tion number in Figure 11. 4 The general worsening performance over rounds across these conditions suggests that increasing conventionalisation in hu-man referring expressions leads to more idiosyn-cratic expressions (as in Boyce et al., 2025) that are harder to resolve. Interestingly, humans (and some models) showed highest performance in the second repetition (rather than the first); this trend was also observed in the ablated condition results in Fig-ure 3. This phenomenon suggests that there might be a trace of practice effects in human describers, whereby they exhibit increasing systematisation from the first to the second repetition, before show-ing conventionalisation of expressions. 

> 4Note that the results for the no context condition are identical to those in Figure 3 as they were shown by original repetition number in that plot. Figure 12: Item-wise variation in accuracy across match-ers and conditions. Error bars indicate bootstrapped 95% confidence intervals. Dashed lines indicate the chance level (0.083).

B.2 Humans are more correlated with each other than with models 

Correlation values between models and naïve hu-mans, as well as human split-half correlations, are shown in Table 2. For the shuffled and random conditions, we averaged accuracies for each orig-inal trial prior to calculating correlations. Human split-half correlations were computable only for yoked and backward conditions, in which multiple participants saw the same trials in the exact same order. We also note that the human split-half cor-relations are likely underestimated as some splits did not have the whole set of original trials in each split, and thus had some dropped trials. Overall, models were less similar to humans than humans were to other humans in the yoked and backward conditions; we hypothesise that the same would be true for the shuffled and random conditions if appropriate data were available. 

B.3 Items show large variation in performance 

Figure 12 shows the item-wise performance for all matchers and conditions. Both naïve humans and models display large item-wise variation, with the magnitude of this variation sometimes exceeding that due to repetition number, matcher, or condition, replicating the item-wise variation found by Boyce et al. (2025). There appears to be some shared vari-ance across models, although each model also has particular idiosyncrasies and biases (e.g., Molmo 2 appears to be especially accurate for tangram E compared to other models). 

B.4 Conditions pattern with each other systematically 

Drawing inspiration from representational similar-ity analysis (Kriegeskorte et al., 2008), we con-ducted a correlation analysis over the confusion matrices for each model across conditions under full feedback. We constructed confusion matrices for each model–condition combination by taking the mean of the probability distributions across tri-als for each target tangram. We then calculated the Pearson’s correlation among the confusion matrices for all conditions. The resultant correlograms are shown in Figure 13. These correlograms demon-strate relatively high correlations across conditions for all models (all r > . 85 ), except for the ab-lated condition ( r = .25 – .91) and the no context condition ( r = -.01 – .85). Furthermore, all mod-els show a similar pattern of correlations, with the yoked, shuffled, and backward conditions cluster-ing together, the other-within, other-across, and random conditions clustering together, and the ab-lated and no context conditions being the most distinct from the other conditions. This pattern of results partly reflects the differences in overall performance across the different conditions, but also supports the idea that relevance is a crucial organising dimension of the content of contextual information. 

B.5 Lemmas are related to model–human discrepancies 

To understand the discrepancies between models and humans, we used model and naïve human re-sponses in the random condition under interactive limited feedback, in which there was limited rel-evant context, although we note that our method could be applied to other conditions as well. We es-timated the discrepancy between model and human performance by calculating the difference between model and human accuracy for each unique trial, averaging across all models and runs. Then, we lemmatised the message texts in each trial using UDPipe (Straka, 2018), and estimated the means and 95% confidence intervals of the model–human discrepancy for each unique lemma across all tri-als in which that lemma occurred. We recentred these discrepancy scores by subtracting the grand mean in discrepancy across all trials (-0.36), and determined the significance of the centred discrep-ancy (CD) estimates by calculating whether the 95% confidence intervals contained zero. These Table 2: Human split-half correlations and model–human correlations for the yoked, shuffled, backward, and random conditions. Human split-half correlations show the mean and 95% confidence interval over 1000 random splits.                               

> r
> Condition Human split-half Qwen 3 VL Gemma 3 Llama 3.2 Molmo 2 Kimi VL Yoked .42 [ .32 , . 50] .08 −.07 −.02 .46 .19
> Backward .48 [ .40 , . 55] .20 −.07 .02 .40 .19
> Shuffled –.23 .02 .16 .47 .31
> Random –.23 .04 .11 .59 .29
> Figure 13: Correlation in confusion matrices across conditions for all models.

CD values reflected whether models were better or worse than average, in comparison to humans. We also filtered down to lemmas that occurred in at least 4 games and in at least 20 trials (i.e., their discrepancies were not due to a small number of idiosyncratic games). The CD values for selected lemmas are shown in Figure 14. Manual inspection of the resulting estimates re-flects the role of metaphors in model–human dis-crepancy. Lemmas relating to literal features of the tangram such as geometric shapes (e.g., “trian-gle”, “diamond”, “square”) and spatial locations (e.g., “left”, “side”, “top”) had CD values that were positive or not different than zero. Conversely, words which required more metaphorical interpre-tations, including “skater” and “bunny”, as well as interpretations of tangram parts as body parts (e.g., “ear”, “leg”, “foot”), had negative CD values. Interestingly, some metaphorical words including “guy” and “man” had positive CD values; it is pos-sible that these words were generic enough that they were highly frequent and could be found in many combinations with other lemmas, including with other literal descriptors. These results also converge with our span-based analysis of model and human performance in Section 4.6. 

B.6 Given additional practice, models still fail to improve 

The change in models’ performance over repeti-tions is a function of both the change in the human descriptions of the tangrams, as well as models getting better at the task of interpreting descrip-tions. To isolate the effect of practice over trials, we tested models on additional conditions in which we repeated the descriptions from a single round of the reference game; thus, the descriptions were held constant, and models had multiple chances to learn from a specific set of descriptions. We tested two conditions drawing from descriptions that were originally in the first round and the last round, under interactive limited feedback. As shown in Figure 15A, models performed ex-tremely poorly in the practice conditions, revealing that they do not learn adequately with practice. Af-ter a small initial boost from the first to the second rounds, performance plateaus at <0.4. We then checked whether models’ poor performance was due to perseverating on their own previous incor-rect answer; to do so, we examined whether the response with the highest log probability also had the highest log probability in the previous repetition (including ties). Figure 15B shows that this trend was indeed the case, with all models perseverat-ing almost 100% of the time. In fact, perseveration went up slightly over repetitions, suggesting that in-Figure 14: Centred discrepancy in model versus human accuracies in the random condition for selected lemmas, categorised by semantic categories. Error bars indicate 95% confidence intervals. Dashed line indicates zero (i.e., discrepancy equal to the grand mean). Empty/filled points indicate whether the confidence intervals do/do not include zero respectively. 

> Figure 15: (A) Matcher accuracies and (B) likelihood of perseverating on their previous answer for practice conditions. Error bars indicate bootstrapped 95% confi-dence intervals. Dashed lines indicate the chance level (0.083).
> Figure 16: Proportion of invalid responses for frontier models under interactive limited feedback.

stead of learning, models became more entrenched in incorrect responses. Together with results from Section 4.4, these patterns show that invalid in-context information significantly worsens model performance. 

B.7 Frontier models sometimes, but rarely, return invalid responses 

As mentioned in A.3, for frontier models, we parsed the responses to ignore non-answer text af-ter the model’s response. However, on occasion, models would fail to return a parsable answer in 256 tokens, leading to invalid responses. These were ignored when calculating response probabil-ities and accuracies. Figure 16 shows the rate of invalid responses across our frontier models, which were relatively low overall.